So who likes modals?
Nobody.
They're like the worst objectively.
No, no, I do not believe you.
You actually don't like models.
Let me tell you.
Just kidding.
You might like my models.
I just don't understand why.
[COUGH] Models are terrible
user interface experiences, but
we still use them everywhere because
we haven't discovered a better way as
developers to inform users
that something is happening.
So despite the fact that I'm
railing on models right now,
I'm going to show you how to make models.
Because someone at your next job
some lovely Program Manager like me,
he was like, hey,
we should have a model here.
I hate myself.
Just kidding.
Alright, so let's go to that.
Let's go do models.
So the thing about models is like
this has to show up like in front of
the user, right?
It's got to show up in front of
all of the stuff in front of you.
So let's say inside of pet for
whatever reason, right?
So here inside of our
sorry inside of details,
I wanted to trigger a modal, right?
If someone clicks adopts this right,
then I want to pop up a modal but
my problem with react at the moment
is that where is details?
Well details is inside of
the div that's inside of app and
then have to go into details.
So if I try and
show like modal right here,
it's going to be still be inside
of the details component.
In other words,
I want to render something somewhere else,
in another part of my application
from within one of the components.
It's kind of a weird problem and
it used to be pretty difficult to solve.
You either had to get some
weird CSS going on or
you had to work outside of React,
which is not a good idea either.
Well, the React team came up
with the idea of a portal.
And it's a million times easier
to use than it used to be.
So I want you to open your
index dot HTML that we have.
Okay, here, above route I
want you to make another div.
And I want it to be ID equals modal.
And don't put anything in modal.
So now we can render outside above route
objectively, right, because route is still
limited to this and then we can render
sometimes into this when we need to.
So it's another like render point.
I want you to make a new file,
call it modal.js.
And we're going to say import use effect.
Use ref.
We also may talk about ref,
which is another fun one.
From react.
Here we're going to say const.
Modal route equals document.
Get element by ID Modal.
This is going to be what
we're going to render into.
We're going to say const.
Modal.
Now we forgot that as well.
Up here we also have to import
create portal from react-dom
Okay, const modal equals, I'm going
to pull out children from the props.
Because modal doesn't actually care
what it's going to render, right?
It's just going to render
whatever is passed into it.
So const children,
We're going to make a ref.
So let's talk about Refs here in
just a second, elRef = useRef null.
And then I want to say if elRef.current.
So if this doesn't exist
then elRef.current =
document.createElement('div').
So let's talk about what happened here.
Let's talk about useRef first.
We'll get more into this intermediate
react I have a whole section talking about
what it is.
But elRef or Ref is a container for
state that you want to
survive past render cycles.
So for example, we have this elRef current
equals to document create Amanda Dev.
We only want one dip.
We want to we don't want to create
a new div on every rerender.
We want to have exactly
one div all the time.
So what we're doing here is we're saying,
hey,
if this elRef doctrine
hasn't been initialized,
we want to initialize it to be this div
and then we want this div to survive past
renders until you dispose of the modal
altogether and then you'll destroy it.
Right?
But until then,
I just want one I want
exactly one because I don't.
This document I create is not cheap,
right?.
So you don't wanna just
rerender it every single time.
And we also need to hold
on to the same one so
that eventually we can dispose of it.
Does that make sense?.
So if you want to have like some
piece of state that you want exactly
one of instead of a component,
you can use these things called Refs.
They're useful for other things but
they're particularly useful in
this particular case as well.
All right, so
here we're going to say use effect.
And then, if not so low in the code there.
We're going to say modalRoot.append child.
ElRef, .current.
So we're going to append this to the dom.
And then,
we also need to clean up after we're done.
So we're going to read we
talked about this earlier but
this is how you clean up an effect.
So whenever we're done we're going
to say module route.remove
child elRef.current.
And then we only want
this to happen once so
we're going to give it
an empty array there.
So basically what we're saying here is,
hey, whenever you get created,
insert it into the dom, whenever you
are done, remove me from the dom, and
this prevents memory leaks, otherwise
you'd be leaking divs every single time
that you created a modal and then
unrendered a modal, that makes any sense.
Okay, then down here, we're just
going to say return create portal.
Div.
We're going to wrap this in a div.
I know it's a bit of modal soup or
a div soup, but
the reason being is that sometimes
children can be like a list of elements,
and top level elements always
have to be a single thing.
You can use fragments in other places.
And we'll talk about fragments later.
But for now, just trust me put a div here.
It'll make your life easier.
Otherwise you'll get some
random errors sometimes, so
I'm going to put children here.
And then we're going to say elRef.current,
which is going to be this
div that we created, right?
And there we go.
Now we can say export default, Modal.
And now we can use this modal
anywhere that we want to,
this is now a reusable modal component.
Which is pretty great, right?
But now we can render modals whenever we
need to, from any part of our application.
Yeah, that's a good question.
So like,
why would I use a reference to that like
I why don't I just say like const
container equals blah right or for this.
So I think for actually this particular
use case of modal we could have because
we're only going to have
one modal at a time.
I have to try this, but
this is what occurs to me.
However, what happens if we have
multiple models at the same time?
One, fire designer,
that's my first thing I'd say about that.
Secondly, you're not always going
to use portals for that reason,
like imagine if you had a portal
that renders to a sidebar and
another one that renders to the bottom
bar and those kinds of different places.
Those could have multiple different
containers that they'd be referencing.
But if you have a global
variable like this,
they're all going to be
referencing the same div.
And that's not actually what you want.
You want each modal to be
totally self contained, right?
So that I can have on each,
portal as it were all right?
You want each portal to be
totally contained, right?
So this makes it unique
per instance of modal.
Which is why you need to use a ref so
that each one has its own.
You can't just reference
the same global one.
Kind of an advanced use case,
but suffice to say,
if that didn't make any sense
to just trust me until you
understand that .Yeah
>> Do all refs need to be cleaned up?
>> Nope.
Just ones that need to be
cleaned up [LAUGH] So for
example, this one gets
appended to the dom.
So even though I stopped referencing it,
it's still gonna be in the dom, right?
So the dom is holding on to it.
So if I had like rendered and unrendered,
a bunch of models, I would have 50 divs,
empty divs just sitting there
because it's appending into the dom.
So not every reference to be cleaned up,
but
everything from the dom that gets appended
the dom does have to be cleaned up.
Good question.
Other questions?
>> Yeah, can you clarify a bit more
on what the create role is doing?
A bit confused with it.
>> Let's open our app.js and
just scroll to the bottom here.
It's basically what react
dom is rent doing here.
So it's just saying hey,
render me out to wherever I'm meant to go,
right?
So in this particular case
this one renders out to route.
This one's saying hey,
put whatever I have in children here,
put this div into, This.
So it's rendering out to
the dom at that location.
That makes sense?
>> Why not use the React
dom that's my thing here.
So like you can't use the same thing,
again,
like the React dom dot render for
the modal as well.
>> No, because you're rendering
basically outside of itself, right?
In other words,
it might have been able to overload it but
it would have been confusing.
So they created two separate methods for
it.